.TH TUNL 1 "December 2024" "tunl 2.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tunl \- IPv6-first self-hosting toolkit
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tunl
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B tunl
.B \-f
.I port:host:port
.br
.B tunl
.B \-\-help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tunl
is a complete self-hosting toolkit for home servers. It provides TCP proxying,
DNS dynamic updates, automatic TLS certificates, and connectivity diagnostics.
.PP
With IPv6, every device on your network has a globally routable public IP \-
no NAT, no port forwarding, no VPS required.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B serve
Start the TCP proxy server. Reads rules from config file or command line.
.TP
.B dns
Manage DNS dynamic updates. Detects IPv6 prefix changes and updates DNS records.
.TP
.B cert
Manage TLS certificates using ACME/Let's Encrypt.
.TP
.B check
Run connectivity and reachability diagnostics.
.TP
.B tui
Launch the terminal user interface dashboard.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Global Options"
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help message.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information.
.SS "Serve Options"
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-config " " \fIpath\fR
Configuration file path (default: tunl.conf).
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-forward " " \fIport:host:port\fR
Quick forward mode: listen on first port, forward to host:port.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-daemon
Run as a background daemon.
.SS "DNS Options"
.TP
.BR \-\-provider " " \fIprovider\fR
DNS provider: "cf" (Cloudflare) or "rfc2136".
.TP
.BR \-\-hostname " " \fIname\fR
Hostname to update.
.TP
.BR \-\-token " " \fItoken\fR
API token for DNS provider.
.TP
.BR \-\-monitor
Run continuously, monitoring for IP changes.
.SS "Cert Options"
.TP
.BR \-\-domain " " \fIdomain\fR
Domain name for the certificate.
.TP
.BR \-\-email " " \fIemail\fR
Contact email for Let's Encrypt.
.TP
.BR \-\-staging
Use Let's Encrypt staging server (for testing).
.SS "Check Options"
.TP
.BR \-\-hostname " " \fIname\fR
Hostname to check DNS resolution for.
.TP
.BR \-\-port " " \fIport\fR
Port to check for listeners (default: 443).
.SH EXAMPLES
Quick forward:
.PP
.RS
tunl -f 8080:localhost:3000
.RE
.PP
Start with config file:
.PP
.RS
tunl serve -C /etc/tunl.conf -d
.RE
.PP
Update DNS on Cloudflare:
.PP
.RS
tunl dns --provider cf --hostname my.example.com --token API_TOKEN
.RE
.PP
Get TLS certificate:
.PP
.RS
tunl cert --domain my.example.com --email me@example.com
.RE
.PP
Check connectivity:
.PP
.RS
tunl check --hostname my.example.com --port 443
.RE
.PP
Launch dashboard:
.PP
.RS
tunl tui
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/tunl.conf
Default configuration file location (when installed).
.TP
.I /var/lib/tunl/certs/
Certificate storage directory.
.TP
.I /var/lib/tunl/account.key
ACME account key.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT, SIGTERM
Graceful shutdown.
.TP
.B SIGPIPE
Ignored (handled internally).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nginx (8),
.BR haproxy (1),
.BR caddy (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Written following Linux kernel coding standards.
.SH LICENSE
GPL-2.0. See LICENSE file.
